# Subspecies project
This project is part of the ChamberTempRNA project, but because it involves very different analyses I am treating it as its own. We have individual WGS data from three subspecies of ostriches that used to be raised on the Oudtshoorn research farm: *Struthio camelus australis*, also referred to as "blue", *S.c. massaicus*, also referred to as "red", and the semi-domesticated form common on Klein Karoo ostrich farms which is thought to originate from *S.c. australis* admixed with *S.c. camelus*, and is often referred to as "South African blacks", here referred to as "black". The aim of this project is to evaluate the significance of the candidate genes from the ChamberTempRNA project for thermal adaptation by identifying potential variation between subspecies in those genes or adjacent regions.
The steps folder contains the code for the following analysis steps. 
## Mapping
This folder contains the scripts for trimming and mapping the raw reads and some QC. In short, I removed adapters and trimmed reads using TrimGalore, discarding reads with a Phred score below 20 and removing Ns. Then reads were mapped using bwa mem with default settings, adding sample names as read groups. Most samples were sequenced twice on different flow cells, so after mapping the BAM files from the same samples were merged. Using samtools, duplicates were marked and, after some statistics, discarded. I also filtered out reads with a MQ below 20. QC results can be found in the respective subspecies folders red, black and blue in mapping/outputs/ and mapping/QC.
## Variant calling
This folder contains the scripts for joint variant calling. It splits the genome into scaffolds and the scaffolds into 1 MB chunks and then calls variants with freebayes, also keeping monomorphic sites. I discarded scaffolds that are shorter than 1000 bp here (accounting to 0.16% of the genome). The --populations option was used to inform freebayes of subspecies membership. The population-based bayesian inference model is thus partitioned on the basis of the populations. Then the vcf files were concatenated into one file for statistics and filtering.
## Variant filtering
This folder contains the scripts for variant filtering steps used before determining population/subspecies differentiation. In short, sites were filtered for a mean depth of at least a third of average depth (--> 10X) and at most twice average depth (--> 60X), and sites missing in more than 10% of samples (i.e 3 individuals) were removed. Then indels and multiallelic sites werer removed. (Sites out of HWE with p < 0.01 were determined separately for each subspecies and removed and results were compared with and without HWE filtering which did not make a great difference, thus the unfilitered VCF file was used after.)
For population structure analyses, monomorphic sites, sites with QUAL below 20 and minor allele frequency below 3% (i.e. singletons) were removed, and 3 individuals that were closely related to others were removed (full sibs and parents) (and one with poor depth).
## Pop structure
This folder contains further filtering steps that were only done for population structure analyses (PCA and Admixture). Monomorphic sites, sites with QUAL below 20 and minor allele frequency below 3% (i.e. singletons) were removed, and 3 individuals that were closely related to others were removed (full sibs and parents). SNPs were linkage pruned using Plink. The pruned set was then used for PCA with Plink. ADMIXTURE was then run for k=2,...,5.
## Fst
This folder contains some overall population differentiation analyses that were not further used or analysed.
## Targeted Fst
This folder contains the targeted population differentiation analysis using scripts by Simon Martin (https://github.com/simonhmartin/genomics_general). The option --windCoords with the regions of interest containing the genes from the gene expression analysis was used. We included 250 bp upstream of the start codons to hopefully include promoter regions, but we also tested other promotor sizes.
## R_scripts
This folder contains scripts for checking variant filtering and scripts for further analysis and plotting of population structure and differentiation results.  
